\documentclass{acmsiggraph}                     % final
%\documentclass[annualconference]{acmsiggraph}  % final (annual conference)
%\documentclass[review]{acmsiggraph}            % review \documentclass[widereview]{acmsiggraph}
%% wide-spaced review \documentclass[preprint]{acmsiggraph}          % preprint

%% Uncomment one of the five lines above depending on where your paper is
%% in the conference process. ``review'' and ``widereview'' are for review
%% submission, ``preprint'' is for pre-publication, and ``final'' is for
%% the version to be printed. The ``final'' variant will accept the 
%% ``annualconference'' parameter, which changes the height of the space
%% left clear for the ACM copyright information.

%% The 'helvet' and 'times' packages define the typefaces used for
%% serif and sans serif type in this document. Computer Modern Roman 
%% is used for mathematics typesetting. The scale factor is set to .92
%% to bring the sans-serif type in line with the serif type.

\usepackage[scaled=.92]{helvet} \usepackage{times} \usepackage{latexsym} \usepackage{url}

%% The 'graphicx' package allows for the inclusion of EPS figures.

\usepackage{graphicx}

%% use this for zero \parindent and non-zero \parskip, intelligently.

\usepackage{parskip}

%% Optional: the 'caption' package provides a nicer-looking replacement
%% for the standard caption environment. With 'labelfont=bf,'textfont=it',
%% caption labels are bold and caption text is italic.

\usepackage[labelfont=bf,textfont=it]{caption}

%% If you are submitting a paper to the annual conference, please replace 
%% the value ``0'' below with the numeric value of your OnlineID. 
%% If you are not submitting this paper to the annual conference, 
%% you may safely leave it at ``0'' -- it will not be included in the output.

\usepackage{listings} \usepackage{alltt} \usepackage{subfigure}

%%\usepackage[caption=false]{subfig}

%%\onlineid{paper1041}

%% Paper title.

\title{The X3D Geospatial Component: X3DOM implementation of GeoOrigin, GeoLocation, GeoViewpoint,
and GeoPositionInterpolator nodes}

%% Author and Affiliation (single author).

%%\author{Roy G. Biv\thanks{e-mail: roy.g.biv@aol.com}\\Allied Widgets Research}

%% Author and Affiliation (multiple authors).


\author{Andreas Plesch\thanks{e-mail: andreasplesch@gmail.com}\\Harvard University \and Michael
McCann\thanks{e-mail: mccann@mbari.org}\\MBARI \and Don Brutzman\thanks{e-mail:
brutzman@nps.edu}\\Naval Postgraduate School}


%% Keywords that describe your work.

\keywords{3-D Geography, X3D, geospatial, X3D-Geospatial, X3D-Earth, X3DOM }

%%%%%% START OF THE PAPER %%%%%%

\begin{document}

%%\teaser{
%%\subfigure{
%%\includegraphics[width=7in]{STOQSUIscreencapture.png}
%%
%%}

%%\caption{Screen capture of the STOQS web application showing underwater sensor data off the coast of southern California.}
%%\label{fig:STOQSscreencapture}
%%}




%% The ``\maketitle'' command must be the first command after the
%% ``\begin{document}'' command. It prepares and prints the title block.

\maketitle

%% Abstract section.

\begin{abstract}

We present new implementations of important X3D nodes which enable a large class of geospatial
applications in standard web browsers. We have chosen the freely available X3DOM code base as an
implementation framework since it provides a very functional set of X3D nodes along with a broad
selection of support functionality. In our implementations of the GeoOrigin, GeoLocation,
GeoViewpoint and GeoPositionInterpolator nodes, we fully conform to the ISO specification and use
well known example scenes as references for correctness. While GeoOrigin is deprecated in the v3.3
of the specification, we demonstrate that limited precision in the webgl rendering pipeline still
make its use desirable at least until alternative solutions are formalized and coded. GeoLocation
and GeoViewpoint nodes require specific alignments of coordinate systems which we document in
detail. In addition, GeoViewpoint has the property to control navigation speed which conceptually
conflicts with user speed control. We resolve this conflict by using relative speed and also make
this control optional. Somewhat terse language in the GeoPositionInterpolator specification required
clarification of its existing usage and inspired an option for coordinate interpolation along great
circles which is often the expected interpolation path in global scenes. Finally, all functionality
was integrated into current, stable releases of the X3DOM distribution available from www.x3dom.org.

\end{abstract}

%% ACM Computing Review (CR) categories. 
%% See <http://www.acm.org/class/1998/> for details.
%% The ``\CRcat'' command takes four arguments.

\begin{CRcatlist} \CRcat{I.3.7}{Computing Methodologies}{Computer Graphics}{Three-Dimensional
  Graphics and Realism} \end{CRcatlist}

%% The ``\keywordlist'' command prints out the keywords.
\keywordlist

\section{Background}

\copyrightspace
%% The ``\copyrightspace'' command must be the first command after the 
%% start of the first section of the body of your paper. It ensures the
%% copyright space is left at the bottom of the first column on the first
%% page of your paper.

The ability to use geospatially well registered geometry and geospatially informed data structures
was recognized as an important concept early in the development of virtual worlds where they were to
reflect the physical word. Consequently, specialized geospatial nodes found their way into the
definition of the Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) in the late 1990s \cite{reddy2000}. In
the early 2010s, the successor to VRML --- X3D --- gained traction and became significantly more
accessible by the availability of X3DOM, an openly developed JavaScript X3D interpreter and renderer
\cite{behr09}, while webgl became a standard feature in web browsers. X3D is designed to be modular
\cite{x3d05} and retains geospatial functionality in a dedicated geospatial component. Here, we
present new implementations of important nodes of the geospatial component within the X3DOM code
framework.


\section{Motivation}

The X3D geospatial component occupies a unique space between the worlds of Geographical Information
System (GIS) and 3D computer graphics. GIS traditionally works with a map based representation of
geographical features while treating the third dimension of elevation or depth as attribute or
property rather than an independent dimension equally relevant to the map dimensions. Although
modern GIS systems (PostGIS or ArcGIS, for example) allow use of three dimensional coordinates in
specifying geometrical elements, they remain based on a 2D, map based world view both in terms of
analysis and visualization. On the other hand, there are many inherently three dimensional
geospatial data sets and problems which makes them more difficult to use or solve in a GIS
environment.  Examples include geological and geophysical data of the subsurface, atmospheric and
climate data, or oceanographic data concerned with part or the full volume of what occupies the
majority of the planet. In fact, global data sets benefit strongly from a 3D analysis and
visualization environment since the shape of the geoid is not suited to faithful projection onto a
2D plane. The X3D geospatial components addresses this need in terms of visualization. At the same
time it is part of the full X3D scene graph which provides the basis for interactive modes of
exploration of geospatial data sets which are generally not targeted by GIS. At a practical level,
essentially unlimited sharing of visualizations of geospatial 3D data sets becomes straightforward
with the use of the X3DOM geospatial component and world wide web technologies.


\section{The X3D geospatial component and digital globes}

Digital globes, either web based such as Cesium \cite{cesium15} or standalone such as Google Earth
\cite{googleearth15}, may be seen to offer similar functionality as the X3D geospatial component.
After all, they also portray the physical earth in 3D. However, it is important to state that the
X3D geospatial component targets generalized functionality and is not restricted to the planet's
surface. In fact, given sufficient data sets, a digital globe could be declared in an X3D scene,
and, given sufficient performance, then rendered in a geospatially enabled X3D browser. In this
context a digital globe can be seen as just one of many possible applications of X3D and its
geospatial component. The newly implemented nodes then could work towards enhancing such an
X3D-declared, digital globe with user content such as buildings, mines or dynamic submarines, user
views, or user interactions.

\section{The Nodes}

\subsection{The geocentric coordinate system}

Before we present details on functionality and implementation of the newly available nodes, it is
useful to outline the use of coordinate systems in the X3D geospatial component. While in regular
X3D scenes the XZ plane is considered horizontal and the +Y direction as pointing vertically
upwards, in geospatial scenes the X,Y and Z coordinates are used as geocentric coordinates. The
origin of the geocentric coordinate system is the center of the planet, the +X direction points to 0
degrees longitude, the +Z direction points to the north pole, and the +Y direction point to 90
degrees longitude east. The units are meters. Using this definition allows use of any X3D node with
the proper geocentric coordinates in conjunction with geospatial nodes. This may be considered
useful in praxis where an external geospatial database provides data and also the necessary
coordinate transformations.

\subsection{GeoOrigin}

The GeoOrigin node is a helper node, which is deprecated but still useful for improving rendering
precision due to limitations of the webGL rendering pipeline. While JavaScript uses double precision
floating point numbers for any numeric operation, webGL seems to only use single precision floating
point numbers. This limits precision for geocentric coordinates which are on the order of $10^{6}$
meters to about 1 meter which is not sufficient for many applications
(Fig.~\ref{fig:GeoOriginImage}). The GeoOrigin node works by providing a local origin the
coordinates of which are then subtracted from node coordinates to arrive at smaller numbers to pass
on to the rendering pipeline for greater precision (Fig.~\ref{fig:GeoOriginDiagram}).

\begin{figure*}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=6.6in]{GeoOriginImage.png} \caption{An
  architectural X3D scene (x3dom.org) without (left) and with (right) use of a GeoOrigin node.
Without GeoOrigin lack of precision leads to rendering artefacts.} \label{fig:GeoOriginImage}
\end{figure*}


A peculiar feature of the GeoOrigin node is that although only a single definition of it is sensible
in a geospatial scene, it needs to be provided for each node separately as a child node.

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=2.0in]{GeoOriginDiagram.png} \caption{The
  position of a GeoOrigin node is given in the vicinity of a geospatial scene (stippled box). The
scene is translated towards the X3D coordinate origin for greater coordinate precision.}
\label{fig:GeoOriginDiagram} \end{figure}

Another feature of the GeoOrgin node is the rotateYUp field. It is a somewhat difficult concept to
grasp. It rotates the local (geospatial) Up (skywards) direction to the scene +Y direction. In that
sense it may be thought of as "rotateUptoY". In the ISO specification language this rotation is
called an alignment which leaves the point about which the rotation is performed undefined.
Similarly, the specification is silent on the axis about which the rotation may be performed. In our
implementation we choose the GeoOrigin point as the point of rotation (Fig.~\ref{fig:RotateYUp}) and
the axis of rotation such that the direction pointing north becomes aligned with the scene -Z
direction. The local (geospatial) Up (skywards) direction is also not strictly defined in the
specification. It can differ slightly from vertex to vertex in a geospatial scene or even
significantly in the case of large, country  or continent sized scenes. In our implementation we
choose to use the Up direction at the position of the GeoOrigin point which is constant throughout a
scene (Fig.~\ref{fig:RotateYUp}).

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=2.0in]{RotateYUp.png} \caption{This slice of
  the earth through the equator shows how the RotateYUp rotation of the GeoOrigin field works in our
implementation. The local Up direction is given at the position of the GeoOrigin which is then
aligned with the Y axis. The rotation occurs about the position of the GeoOrigin point.}
\label{fig:RotateYUp} \end{figure}

Therefore, for nodes which have a GeoOrigin node defined, our code implements this sequence of
transformation: First the GeoOrigin coordinates are subtracted. Then, if rotateYUp is requested, a
rotation matrix is computed based on how a GeoLocation (see below) node would transform geometry
with the GeoOrigin position as the GeoLocation position. Finally, the calculated rotation matrix is
inverted and applied to each vertex of the node.

Alternatives to solving the precision issue exist \cite{mccann09} (McCann et al., 2009) but still
need refinement and implementation.


\subsection{GeoLocation}

The GeoLocation node is in effect a specialized Transform node to translate the geospatially
unregistered child node's origin to the provided geospatial coordinates, and to rotate the child's
+Y direction to the local Up direction (perpendicular to geoid) as well as the child's -Z direction
towards the local north direction (along the longitude) (Fig.~\ref{fig:GeoLocationDiagram}). It
needs the (inverse) projection from geocentric to latitude and longitude coordinates of the provided
geospatial position.

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=2.0in]{GeoLocationDiagram.png} \caption{This
  slice of earth through the longitudinal plane at the position of a GeoLocation node shows how a
child node (stippled box) is rotated to align the Y axis with the Up direction and translated to the
position of the GeoLocation.} \label{fig:GeoLocationDiagram} \end{figure}

We implement this transformation by first calculating the quaternion representations $q_X$ and $q_Z$
of two rotations: about the X axis by $180 - latitude$ degrees to align +Y with local Up and about
the Z axis by $90 + longitude$ degrees to align -Z with longitude towards north. The product
$q_{Z}q_{X}$ of these quaternions is converted to a rotation matrix $M_r$. Then a transformation
matrix $M_t$ is constructed for a translation to the GeoLocation position. The final transformation
matrix is calculated as the product of the rotation and translation matrices $M_t \times M_r$.

A conceptual complication occurs when rotateYUp is requested in a GeoOrigin node in conjunction with
the GeoLocation node. This will rotate the Up direction back to +Y but note that the rotation occurs
not about the same point: the GeoLocation position is likely different from the position of the
provided GeoOrigin (compare Fig.~\ref{fig:RotateYUp} and Fig.~\ref{fig:GeoLocationDiagram}).
Therefore, an implementation cannot just skip both rotations. Instead, the full transformation path
has to be traversed (by matrix multiplication): Geolocation rotation (about child origin),
Geolocation translation, GeoOrigin (back) translation, rotateYUp rotation.

\begin{figure*}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=6.6in]{Axes_NSEW.png} \caption{The left side
  shows the 'Geospatial Coordinate Axes Nsew Example' slightly modified from the Web3D X3D example
archive as rendered by the xj3d browser, and the same example scene as rendered by X3DOM. The
colored vectors are based on a single coordinate axes scene and then properly positioned at various
locations by GeoLocation nodes.} \label{fig:Axes_NSEW.png} \end{figure*}

\subsection{GeoViewpoint}

The GeoViewpoint is a specialized Viewpoint node with the ability to provide its position in
geospatial coordinates and its view orientation with respect to the local Up direction. It also has
an option to adjust navigation speed based on elevation.

Consequently our implementation is based on the X3DOM Viewpoint code. All fields defined in the ISO
specification are supported, including the deprecated headlight and navType fields. These two fields
are by default "undefined" to allow for the equivalent NavigationInfo node fields to take effect. If
used, they take precedence over the currently bound NavigationInfo node fields.

In the X3DOM framework a Viewpoint node is expected to deliver a view matrix on request. Our code
first computes a viewpoint rotation matrix $M_{vr}$ as the product $M_r \times M_o$ of a rotation
matrix $M_r$ and the node provided orientation $M_o$ converted to matrix where $M_r$ is computed as
in a GeoLocation node including the adjustments for rotateYUp using the position of the
Geoviewpoint. Finally, the view matrix is derived as the inverse of the product $M_t \times M_{vr}$
of the translation matrix $M_t$ constructed from the Geoviewpoint position and the viewpoint
rotation matrix $M_{vr}$.

One additional field of type SFBool called elevationScaling is introduced. It controls the use of
navigation speed scaling by avatar elevation above ground level and is turned on (true) by default
as the ISO specification suggests. The specification's suggestion to compute the scaling factor as
elevation in meters divided by 10 is adopted. Elevation scaled speed is not used for examine and
examine like navigation modes. Even when elevation scaling of speed is turned on users still can
modify their speeds by a user speed factor, eg. with the +/- keys. This is accomplished by treating
elevation scaled speed not as absolute speed but as a factor to the user defined speed. 

The ISO specification does not elaborate on if or how elevation scaling should be updated during
navigation. For many purposes it may suffice to base initial navigation speed on the elevation of
the Geoviewpoint and ignore changes of avatar elevation during navigation. In our X3DOM
implementation, however, the speed is updated frequently which allows for seamless exploration from
great height at satellite elevation down to the height of a person walking. As the implementation of
elevation scaling dynamically updates speed, it relies on getViewMatrix() being called from
Viewarea.js during navigation.

An interesting side effect of speed scaling by elevation is that as the avatar approaches ground
level with an elevation of zero the scaling factor also approaches zero. Therefore the avatar would
stop moving at ground level and would be trapped. Therefore we restrict  the scaling factor to not
fall below 1 at any elevation.

Although the ISO specification language references elevation as measured from the topographic ground
surface, we use elevation measured from the geoid (approximated by ellipsoids) surface for
efficiency.

We also discussed the situation when the avatar is below ground level or sea level, eg. when
elevation is negative. Currently, we simply use the absolute magnitude of elevation. Another useful
option would be the ability to provide a local datum elevation as reference height from which
elevation could be measured.

Other details include resetting the center of rotation when the viewpoint is reset, and support of
the rotateYUp field if a GeoOrigin child node is used. RotateYUp allows navigation modes which
assume that the Up direction aligns with the positive Y axis to work correctly.


\subsection{GeoPositionInterpolator}

The GeoPositionInterpolator node works similar to the PositionInterpolator node. It interpolates
between geospatial coordinates and outputs both coordinates in the specified reference system
(geoSystem) and also scene coordinates. The ISO specification is very clear that the
geovalue\_changed field contains the interpolated geo-coordinates. The specification wording for
value\_changed, however, is somewhat ambiguous. The initial implementation of the node
\cite{reddy2000} and feedback from long-time users strongly suggest that the value\_changed field
provides scene coordinates. Scene coordinates are geocentric coordinates adjusted for a GeoOrigin
when provided.

The specification is silent on what kind of interpolation is provided by the node. Early
\cite{reddy2000} and most existing implementations (xj3d, freewrl) of the node use linear
interpolation of the coordinates, before their transformation to geocentric coordinates. On a planar
surface or for small distances on the geoid, this makes sense and is what would be expected. Going
to large distances on the geoid, for example when looking at an intercontinental flight path or at
satellite tracks, interpolation along the great circle arc between two points becomes more
desirable. A great circle measures the shortest distance between two points on a sphere and is what
is often shown for plane and satellite tracks. Therefore the X3DOM implementation of the node
introduces an additional field called onGreatCircle. It lets a user choose between linear and great
circle type interpolation. Although at small distances a  straight line is closely approximated by a
great circle, the onGreatCircle field is set to false by default for performance and compatibility
reasons. This means by default the node will use linear interpolation to interpolate between
coordinates. The elevation coordinate is linearly interpolated in both interpolation modes.

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=3.3in]{GeoPositionInterpolator1.png}
  \caption{A GeoPositionInterpolator node interpolates the latitude and longitude coordinates of a
  double cone linearly between London and San Francisco. The scene is adopted from the A2 Animated
Geoviewpoint example scene at the web3d archive.} \label{fig:GeoPositionInterpolator1.png}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=3.3in]{GeoPositionInterpolator2.png}
  \caption{A GeoPositionInterpolator node interpolates the position of a double cone on a great
  circle between London and San Francisco.} \label{fig:GeoPositionInterpolator2.png} \end{figure}

In detail, the code first transforms all key values to geocentric coordinates to a new array when
the node is encountered or was changed.  For great circle interpolation, the code then interpolates
the geocentric coordinates for the requested key using this new array via a slerp algorithm
(Shoemake, 1985) which has the property of constant speed, eg. linearly interpolates the arc angle
between two key positions. The geovalue\_changed output is derived from the interpolated geocentric
coordinates by inverse projection depending on the geoSystem. Finally, the  value\_changed output is
computed from the interpolated geocentric coordinates by taking into account a GeoOrigin if
provided. Altogether, these steps involve one coordinate projection per point and 1 or 2 matrix
multiplications: geoOrigin translation and rotateYUp rotation.

For linear interpolation, the code interpolates the geovalue\_changed output using the original key
value array. Then, geocentric coordinates are derived from the interpolated geospatial coordinates
depending on the geoSystem. Finally, the  value\_changed output is computed from the interpolated
geocentric coordinates by taking into account a GeoOrigin if provided. Altogether, these steps
involve one coordinate projection per point and 1 or 2 matrix multiplications: geoOrigin translation
and rotateYUp rotation.

In terms of performance, the great circle interpolation suffers a bit from having to perform a slerp
calculation. However, slerp is very efficient. In fact, limited profiling indicates that the ROUTE
mechanism used with a the GeoInterpolator node may take up more time than the interpolation itself
independent of its type.

\section{Experimental Nodes}

The X3D PROTO and related nodes were designed to and have been used extensively in the past to allow the declaration of experimental nodes with specific and rich functionality. X3DOM does not offer a PROTO node but we found it quite possible to implement custom nodes by following existing coding patterns in this open source project.

\subsection{GeoOriginTransform}

The GeoOriginTransform node is an experimental transform node designed for the situation where a non-geospatial node would be convenient to use and as such would not support a GeoOrigin child node directly. For example, X3DOM offers a facility to load meshes defined in various binary formats which are not geospatially registered but would be ideal to use for large data sets. The geocentric coordinates for such non-geospatial meshes need to be precalculated.

The GeoOriginTransform node then applies to its children geometries the correct translation and optional rotateYUp rotation provided by the GeoOrigin child node. This lets the non-geospatial node be used together with geospatial nodes with the same GeoOrigin. The GeoOriginTransform has the option to ignore the GeoOrigin translation and just apply the rotateYUp rotation for the situation where the non-gespatial node's coordinates already account for this translation.

The X3DOM implementation derives the node from node X3DTransformNode and first defines the two fields it uses: GeoOrigin of type SFNode and OnlyYUp of type SFBool. X3DOM expects from such a transform node functions to return a transformation matrix and to update this matrix when an input field is changed. Thus, we define these functions, compute the proper transformation matrix based on the position of the provided GeoOrigin and return it. These few steps proved to be sufficient to arrive at the desired functionality within the expected time frame.

\subsection{GeoWebMap}

Our experimental GeoWebMap node is an exploration of how a link between "slippy maps" such as generated by Openlayers \cite{OL15} and geospatial X3D could look like. The node works by teleporting an Openlayers map into the X3D scene on the same web page.

The node expects the id of the Openlayers container div, the map's corner coordinates and geoSystem as input fields and then constructs a GeoElevationgrid with the map as a texture. The node supports continuous updates to the input fields. Such updates can be provided by the X3DOM API and can be sourced from the Openlayers API.

The implementation uses the X3DOM GeoElevationGrid node code as a template. It turned out that it was necessary to also implement coordinate transformations between the web mercator projection used by the slippy maps and geocentric coordinates. Another result of the exploration was that it was beneficial to avoid constructing internal representations of underlying X3D nodes such as GeoElevationGrid or Texture and instead aim at immediately providing the output of these nodes.

The implementation of this node required in depth experience with the X3DOM code base which can at this point be most efficiently gained by studying it. We did not attempt to define this or a similar node using PROTO functionality but given the need to support a new coordinate projection, to procedurally generate coordinates and to use a web page canvas as a texture we conjecture that such an attempt would be similarly challenging or even require changes to the underlying implementations of used nodes.  

\section{Applications}

The availability of the geospatial component in a web browser via X3DOM allows for development of
rich  web apps but also for very targeted application which rely exclusively on the X3D scene graph
and standard X3DOM navigation functionality. We briefly describe examples for each scenario.

The Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute designed the Spatial Temporal Oceanographic Query
System (STOQS) \cite{stoqsyoutube} to create new capabilities for scientists to gain insight from
\textit{in situ} sensor measurement data. STOQS employs open standards and is a 100\% free and open
source project. It includes a web-based graphical user interface where X3D Geospatial has been
integrated to enable 3D geospatial data visualization. As described in \cite{mccann14} high
resolution terrain mesh data in geocentric coordinates is combined with geometry built from latitude
and longitude coordinates. Two specific benefits resulting from the improvements described in this
paper ar 1) a GeoOrigin can be specified in situations where high spatial precision is required and
2) GeoViewpoint, with a child GeoOrigin node, provides proper orientation of the +Y axis for fly
mode navigation.

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=3.3in]{Application_STOQS.png} \caption{The
  X3D geospatial component makes complex oceanographic data easy to visualize and understand. This
is frame from a video about the STOQS project that may be viewed on YouTube.}
\label{fig:Application_STOQS.png} \end{figure}

Another simple use case is the easily deployable and accessible visualization of the Community Fault
Model for Southern California \cite{plesch07} which is a foundational data set for earthquake
science and used by diverse set of geoscientists. Using the X3DOM geospatial component it was
possible to make available multiple versions of the data set using limited resources under dead line
pressure \cite{sger14}.

\begin{figure}[htbp] \centering \includegraphics[width=3.3in]{Application_SCEC.png} \caption{The X3D
  geospatial component makes it possible for a wide audience to explore a 3D geological model of
earthquake faults in California by just opening a web page.} \label{fig:Application_SCEC.png}
\end{figure}



\section{Summary}

We present new implementations of important X3D nodes which enable a large class of geospatial
applications in standard web browsers. In our implementations of the GeoOrigin, GeoLocation,
GeoViewpoint and GeoPositionInterpolator nodes, we fully conform to the ISO specification and use
example scenes from well known sources as references for correctness. We demonstrate that limited
precision in the webgl rendering pipeline still make the availability of a GeoOrigin desirable at
least until alternative solutions are formalized and coded. GeoLocation and GeoViewpoint nodes
require specific alignments of coordinate systems which we document in detail including the
treatment of the rotateYUp field. In addition, GeoViewpoint has the property to control navigation
speed which conceptually conflicts with user speed control. We resolve this conflict by using
relative speed and also make this control optional. Somewhat terse language in the
GeoPositionInterpolator specification required clarification of its existing usage and inspired an
option for coordinate interpolation along great circles which is often the expected interpolation
path in global scenes. Finally, all functionality was integrated into current, stable releases of
the X3DOM distribution available from www.x3dom.org.







\bibliographystyle{acmsiggraph} \nocite{*} \bibliography{X3DGeospatialComponent}




\end{document}
